docs/environment_setup.md, before:

# Environment Setup

Follow these steps to run the sandbox locally.

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
git clone https://github.com/aire-program/aire-researcher-sandbox.git
cd aire-researcher-sandbox
```
2. **Create and activate a virtual environment**
   ```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
```
3. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```
4. **Generate synthetic data**
   ```bash
python scripts/generate_synthetic_data.py
```
5. **Run tests**
   ```bash
pytest
```
6. **Launch the Streamlit workbench**
   ```bash
streamlit run app/main.py
```

You can also open notebooks directly in Jupyter or via the Colab badges listed in `docs/colab_index.md`. Each notebook contains a first-cell setup to install requirements automatically when running in Google Colab.

## Verify your setup
- Confirm data files exist: `data/sample_texts/articles_sample.csv`, `data/sample_tabular/experiments_sample.csv`, etc.
- Run `pytest` to validate schemas, API clients, and retrieval indexing.
- Import the app to check dependencies: `python -c "import app.main"`.
- GitHub Actions smoke tests mirror these steps automatically on pushes affecting app, pipelines, data, scripts, or requirements.

## Common setup issues and quick fixes
- **CSV files missing**: Rerun `python scripts/generate_synthetic_data.py`.
- **Import errors (app/api)**: Ensure the repo root is on `PYTHONPATH`; running from repo root with `pytest` handles this, or use `python -c "import app.main"` to confirm.
- **Dependency errors in Colab**: Rerun the first cell of any notebook; it installs required packages.
- **Slow installs in Colab**: Wait for the first cell to finish before running later cells.

Commit message:

Refactor AIRE Researcher Sandbox: Remove unused utils and schemas, enhance documentation, and streamline data generation
- Deleted unused utility functions from app/utils.py.
- Removed outdated JSON schema files for articles, experiments, metrics, and notes.
- Updated architecture and overview documentation to reflect changes in project structure and purpose.
- Revised Colab launch index and environment setup instructions for clarity and accuracy.
- Enhanced usage patterns documentation for researchers, aligning with new workflows.
- Implemented validation for generated datasets against schemas in the data generation script.
- Introduced a paths.py module to centralize dataset and artifact paths for better maintainability.
- Updated tests to reflect schema changes and ensure validation of datasets.

docs/environment_setup.md, after:

# Environment Setup

Follow these steps to run the AIRE Researcher Sandbox synthetic mirror locally. The instructions mirror the internal deployment steps while keeping all data synthetic.

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
git clone https://github.com/aire-program/aire-researcher-sandbox.git
cd aire-researcher-sandbox
```
2. **Create and activate a virtual environment**
   ```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
```
3. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```
4. **Generate synthetic data**
   ```bash
python scripts/generate_synthetic_data.py
```
5. **Run tests**
   ```bash
pytest
```
6. **Launch notebooks or pipelines**
   - Start Jupyter: `jupyter notebook`
   - Or run a script: `python scripts/run_pipeline_example.py`

You can also open notebooks directly in Jupyter or via the Colab badges listed in `docs/colab_index.md`. Each notebook contains a first-cell setup to install requirements automatically when running in Google Colab.

## Verify your setup
- Confirm data files exist: `data/sample_texts/articles_sample.csv`, `data/sample_tabular/experiments_sample.csv`, and related synthetic inputs.
- Run `pytest` to validate schemas, API clients, and retrieval indexing used in the sandbox.
- Import paths to check dependencies: `python -c "import paths"`.
- GitHub Actions smoke tests mirror these steps automatically on pushes affecting notebooks, pipelines, data, scripts, or requirements.

## Common setup issues and quick fixes
- **CSV files missing**: Rerun `python scripts/generate_synthetic_data.py`.
- **Import errors (api)**: Ensure the repo root is on `PYTHONPATH`; running from repo root with `pytest` handles this, or use `python -c "import paths"` to confirm.
- **Dependency errors in Colab**: Rerun the first cell of any notebook; it installs required packages.
- **Slow installs in Colab**: Wait for the first cell to finish before running later cells.
